More details in the documentation of native arrays (#13125)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/language/core/primitive.rst

or execute the extracted code). For instance, an implementation of this module
can be taken from the kernel of Coq (see ``kernel/parray.ml``).

Coq's primitive arrays are persistent data structures. Semantically, a set operation
``t.[i <- a]`` represents a new array that has the same values as ``t``, except
at position ``i`` where its value is ``a``. The array ``t`` still exists, can
still be used and its values were not modified. Operationally, the implementation
of Coq's primitive arrays is optimized so that the new array ``t.[i <- a]`` does not

> copy the whole ``t``. The details are in section 2.3 of :cite:`ConchonFilliatre07wml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
copy all of ``t``. The details are in section 2.3 of :cite:`ConchonFilliatre07wml`.
```

or execute the extracted code). For instance, an implementation of this module
can be taken from the kernel of Coq (see ``kernel/parray.ml``).

Semantically, the set array operation behaves as if the array was first entirely

> copied, then the copy is modified and finally returned. Operationally however,

Reviewer 2: This change is good overall, but a few notes:

1. The beginning of the paragraph talks about “persistent” arrays — I’d say “purely functional” there, or some term making it clear that the semantics doesn’t use mutable state, or maybe add this sentence early.
2. When describing the time/space complexity, I’d still use the term “persistent data structure” because it’s the appropriate technical term, it just needs to be explained; it‘s the name for data structures where “multiple versions exist at the same time”.
3. YMMV, but IMHO “decorator” here doesn’t add much. The rest is good.

Author: @Blaisorblade Different keywords speak to different people. You are comfortable with "persistent data structures" so you want to use that word. Other people use "decorators" a lot and that will speak to them. Can you write here the exact paragraph that you want ?

Reviewer 2: I don't expect all readers to know what persistent data structures are; but since that is the correct technical term, it should appear and be explained. I can try to suggest something later, but @jfehrle's the one in charge.

Reviewer: > but @jfehrle's the one in charge.

I think that overstates the role of reviewers a bit, especially for documentation.  Good reviews often involve some discussion.  If any of my comments doesn't make sense or you disagree with them, please bring that up.  And there are certainly many things in Coq that I don't understand completely.

Author: I added "persistent data structures".

> copied, then the copy is modified and finally returned. Operationally however,

Reviewer 2: The point is that no actual (imperative) "set" operation is provided, only a functional version that returns a modified array.

> copied, then the copy is modified and finally returned. Operationally however,

Reviewer: My point is that the wording is not very good, not that I'm totally clueless about what is meant.

> copied, then the copy is modified and finally returned. Operationally however,

Author: This specification applies even to singleton arrays. Assuming that the single cell is copied before being modified says that the set operations don't affect other parts of the computations where the array is used. In other words, the order of computations does not affect the result of the computation. For example this addition does not depend on whether the left term is computed before or after the right term
`a.[0] + a.[0 <- 2].[0]`

> copied, then the copy is modified and finally returned. Operationally however,

Reviewer: How about "Applying a set operation such as `a.[0 -< 2]` returns a modified array, but it doesn't change `a`."?  Simple and concrete, I think.

> copied, then the copy is modified and finally returned. Operationally however,

Author: done

the array copies are avoided by a mechanism loosely related to the decorator

> design pattern. The full details of the implementation are in section 2.3 of

Author: Fine, we can remove it. It is a pity though, as it's almost the same pattern. And as far as I can tell, the object-oriented patterns are not very well-known in the Coq community. It is an occasion to make a bridge between two communities.

> design pattern. The full details of the implementation are in section 2.3 of

Author: If it is clearer we can add a link to the wikipedia page [](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern)

> design pattern. The full details of the implementation are in section 2.3 of

Reviewer: Generally I think it's a good to avoid introducing concepts that are only mentioned in one place in the doc--unless they're really helpful for the explanation or are terms that every reader should know.

I often find design pattern definitions a bit vague and many people only know a few of them.  And they're for object-oriented code--which Coq uses very little (only CoqIDE AFAIK) and so, I would expect, not used here.  (The Wiki page begins with "In object-oriented programming, the decorator pattern is a design pattern that allows behavior to be added to an individual object, dynamically, without affecting the behavior of other objects from the same class.")

What do you think?

> design pattern. The full details of the implementation are in section 2.3 of

Author: I'll remove it

of Coq's primitive arrays is optimized so that the new array ``t.[i <- a]`` does not
copy the whole ``t``. The details are in section 2.3 of :cite:`ConchonFilliatre07wml`.
In short, the implementation keeps one version of ``t`` as an OCaml native array and
other versions as lists of modifications to ``t``. Accesses to the native array

> version are constant time operations. Accesses to versions where all the cells of
> the array are modified have O(n) access time, the same as a list, which defeats
> the purpose of Coq's primitive arrays. The version that is kept as the native array

Reviewer 3: I would phrase this more positively, e.g.:
```suggestion
version are constant time operations. However, accesses to versions where all the cells of
the array are modified have O(n) access time, the same as a list. The version that is kept as the native array
```

Author: The documentation is not meant to make people happy. It explains what benefits people get when they use the tools appropriately, and it also warns about the dangers when they use the tools badly. In an algorithm with many sets and gets, it is not clear that primitive arrays are faster than lists.

Reviewer 2: It's not about happiness, but clarity. The manual to give time complexities and explains when they are advantageous. If you need to say "defeat the purpose", it means you've said something inaccurate which you are now correcting, which is less clear.

> :cite:`ConchonFilliatre07wml`. In short, multiple versions of the array coexist
> in memory. One of those versions is special and directly stored as an OCaml
> native array. Accesses to that special version are constant time operations.
> The other versions of the array are represented as lists of modifications to
> be applied to that native version. Therefore, a version where all cells of the
> array are modified has the same access time as a list, which defeats the
> purpose of Coq's native arrays. Which version is native changes dynamically at
> each get call: the list of modifications is executed inside the OCaml native array,
> and the lists of modifications of the other versions are updated so that they
> still represent the same values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:cite:`ConchonFilliatre07wml`. The algorithm keeps one version as an OCaml native
array and other versions as lists of modifications to that array.
Accesses to the native array version are constant time operations.
Accesses to versions where all the cells of the array are modified has O(n) access time,
the same as a list, which defeats the purpose of Coq's native arrays. The version
that is kept as the native array can change dynamically upon
each get call: a list of modifications may be applied to the native array
and the lists of modifications of the other versions are updated so that they
still represent the same values.
```

How about something like this?  I guessed a little about your meaning, hope
I didn't distort it.

Author: I appreciate that saying "may" and "can" is more flexible and allows us to change the implementation in the future. However this is a feature, not an implementation detail. The re-rooting of the array by the get operation allows algorithms to precisely control their speed of calculation. The documentation should commit to that. I agree with your other modifications.

Reviewer: Are you saying that every time you do a set operation, the native array and the lists of modifications are updated?  Is updating the lists still O(1)?  (FWIW, I would expect some LRU behavior for the various versions though that might not be O(1).)

By all means, make the text accurate.

Reviewer: I updated my suggestion to say "have O(n) access time".

Author: As written in section 2.3.2 of the article, both get and set re-root the array so they are not always O(1). They are idempotent though, from the second call onwards they become O(1) if evaluated on the same version.
